So, we're here with another uh podcast
that's also going to be broadcasted on
our affiliates. Uh we're going to do
another discussion on health and
nutrition, understanding some of the
frontiers of science in the world of
medicine. And to do so, we have a great
uh collection of uh folks talking today
with us. Uh for folks who are not
watching on video, we have again Tucker
Goodrich who is a good friend of mine, a
a nutrition researcher. Uh he's the
proprietor of the Yelling Stop blog,
which you can find all of his uh many uh
posts on variety of different topics. We
also have with us our our friend uh Dr.
Thomas Safe who is at Boston College and
he has been a pioneer voice trying to
explain to uh the medical community and
working with researchers all over the
world about a me metabolic approach to
cancer looking at mitochondrial
dysfunction and how that is the paradigm
shift that we need to get uh cancer in
the rear view mirror of our uh our
society. So thank you uh Tucker and
thank you Dr. Safe for joining us.
>> An honor as always. Yeah, it's a
pleasure to be here.
>> So, Dr. Safrey, let's just kick it off
with you. You sent me a paper of some
new uh study you guys have done and I
want to learn all about it. Tell us f
what you've been up to.
>> Well, um thanks David. You know, we
we've been following this young man for
many many years. um Pablo Kelly, he he
was the subject of uh many news reports
from the UK about his uh rejection of
standard of care for his for to manage
his glyobblasto.
um we didn't know at the time uh you
know what was going on here only only
the fact that he said he did not want
radiation or chemo and was willing to
engage in metabolic using metabolic
therapy in an attempt to manage his
disease. So he he knew about our work.
Um he was diagnosed in August 2014
uh through pathological assessments and
and MRI brain scans that he that he had
a glyopblasto
and he was not predict you know maybe if
he lived 12 months uh that would have
been good you with standard of care he
could have gotten maybe another month
but his choice not to do anything no
surgery no radiation no chemo just
metabolic approach was um uh received
very poorly by I guess the the
physicians. They they strongly
encouraged that he do not he does he
should not do that. But he rejected
their adi advice. He contacted me in
uh letting me know that he had been uh
monitoring his blood glucose and ketones
with the with a monitor and that he was
in good therapeutic ketosis. to to put
this in perspective for the audience.
What are the what's the prognosis
typically for somebody who rejects Okay,
let's start it. What's the prognosis for
somebody who doesn't reject the standard
of care for glyopblasto?
>> I mean, there's nothing more
reproducible in in medicine than
survival for glyopblasto following the
standard of care. It is absolutely
replicated in every major study. You
don't live long. if you can get 50. As a
matter of fact, in 1926, Bailey and
Cushing said that without any treatment,
you can expect to live between eight and
14 months.
>> And it's a particularly unpleasant way
to go, I understand.
>> Yeah. No, it's quite devastating in many
in in in many in many ways.
>> So, as far as his as far as his doctors
were concerned, he was essentially
deciding to commit suicide by rejecting
care.
>> Yeah. I mean even if he had taken care
he still would have died quickly but
>> well I don't know I mean I wouldn't call
it suicide I I would say that the
recommended treatment for glyobblasto is
you give highdosese steroids at first
and then you surgically debulk as
quickly as possible and then you
transition the patient to teomamide
uh chemotherapy
uh or at the same time or uh or
congruent with um uh highdose radiation
gamma radiation and then uh the tumor
recurs invariably
uh and most people die the tumor comes
back rapidly. I I published a major
paper with some of my neuros friends
from neurosurgery and and um and uh
radiation oncology showing precisely how
standard of care contributes to the
rapid demise of the patients. It frees
up the two fuels that the tumor cells
absolutely require to grow fast and that
is glucose and glutamine. No.
>> Okay. But you you may be jumping a
little ahead in our story there.
>> Well, it's all right. Uh you know that
you have to realize you know what the
standard of care is. It's called
accelerated tumor progression.
>> But
>> so it's not it's not so he was not
irrational in rejecting the standard of
care.
>> No. He was actually but
>> that's an important point. But but the
question you also asked was uh what is
the outcome of a person who doesn't have
any standard of care and you go back to
Bailey Kushing you know it's about 8 to
14 months um and then they call it best
support of care this is another really
gem for the from the medical they call
it best what is best supportive care
>> well it could be eating McDonald's
hamburgers you know big Dunkin Donuts I
mean it could be anything that anything
and everything that you that doesn't
involve uh radiation and chemo so um
they call it best supportive care. It's
just such an an incredibly vague term
and I looked it up and I there's medical
people talk about it. Anyway, uh he
didn't do best supportive care. He chose
an alternative therapy which is called
metabolic therapy and uh he was doing
reh. But when they did the biopsy
initially in 2014, they also noticed
that he had this IDH1 mutation. Okay, an
IDH1 mutation.
And uh you know it's known that that
it's an acquired mutation. It just
happens by chance alone in somebody's
tumor. It's been noted and published in
many papers that man if you if you just
acquire that mutation for whatever
reason you live a little longer. So um
so he was he had a mutation that uh gave
him a little bit more chance. He was on
the younger side that gives him a little
bit more chance but he postponed
surgical debulking of his tumor for
three years. Most people do surgical
debulking right up front. Some people do
surgical debulking and then I don't want
chemo and radiation. They just do
surgical debulking and that and that can
give them a little bit more uh survival.
>> And that's that's another term that may
confuse folks. Surgical debulking
essentially means you're going in and
removing as much of the tumor as you
can.
>> Yes. And and variable invariably
glyopblasto is never entirely removed.
They always say we got a lot of it but
we never get it all because it invades
into the parankma. You what are you
gonna do? take the whole guy's brain out
and you know you can't do that. So, so
you know um so the bottom line is that
you know he pushed off surgical de uh um
surgery debulking removal of the tumor
uh for almost three years which was
remarkable but we so he contacted me I
uh in 2015 I gave him all this
information he already had some
information he was following the stuff
that we published in the literature and
then in about 2017 he called he emailed
me I said whoa Pablo you're still alive
I'm really I'm really surprised you
know, I I I I here's a guy, you know, he
should have been dead a long time ago
according to all the experts, and he's
still plugging along. And then he says,
you know, I I'm I'm having a few more
seizures and uh maybe I should have the
tumor resected and taken out. And I
said, yeah, you know, you know, you
might want to consider that because he
only had a small biopsy at the
beginning. So after three years, he had
the the the biopsy. He was also getting
many MRIs through the whole thing.
So we decided to follow Pablo more
closely and then we had him collect his
MRIs. Uh we got the hisytologology from
his pathologist. Um and then we began to
follow him and we were noticing that um
when he when he got off the diet just a
little bit that we saw a little bit more
growth of the tumor and then when he got
back on the metabolic ketogenic
metabolic therapy keeping his blood
sugar low and his ketones high the
regret the tumor stopped started to grow
much much slower. So, uh, we followed
him and and, um, and we started to
collect that. People say, "Oh, you got
to write this guy up, though." You know,
and I said, "Well, you know, I don't
know. He could be dead any day and who
knows." And I had a couple of nice video
conference calls with him like I'm doing
with you guys. He was very lucid uh very
eager to share his uh findings. So, at
the surgical debulking, we also uh
confirmed glyopblasto uh who grade four
that means the worst of the worst. uh
but the Idh1 mutation was there again
and he had also had other markers that
were not favorable to his overall
survival. Um but uh so I started looking
into this Idh1 mutation together with
ketogenic metabolic therapy. It turns
out that this mutation can be considered
God's gift to the person with
glyobblasto.
It turns out that this by chance
acquisition of getting this mutation,
the mutation itself targets the very
pathways needed for rapid tumor growth.
Can you believe this? Wait, it's
unbelievable. So the Idh1 mutation
targets the glycolysis pathway, the
pathway that the tumors use glucose to
grow fast and at the same time it
siphons off fuel for the glutamine glut
glutam glutaminolysis pathway. So you
have to realize that all cancers not
just glyopblasto
uh require glucose and glutamine for
rapid growth. There is no tumor that we
know of that does not use glucose and
glutamine. Lung, bladder, colon, breast,
you know, you name it, they all use
glucose and glutamine. Glyobblasto uses
glucose and glutamine.
>> If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ ketoforcancer,
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rockermeer. Within this
new community platform, you can connect
with other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Ciphford. We will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy, as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at school.com/to
for cancer.
So his ketogenic metabolic therapy
was restricting the glycolysis warberg
effect pathway and also competing
uh for for metab a metabolite in the
glutamolysis pathway. So his ketogenic
metabolic therapy was working
synergistically with the chance
acquisition of this Idh1 mutation.
So he he got uh he got two favorable u
outcomes for him. He he acquired a
mutation what we call a therapeutic
mutation together with a metabolic
therapy that uh works synergistically
with the mutation and this can explain
in beautiful terms why this man is
living now.
>> Better lucky than smart I guess is the
description of this situation.
>> I think I I think it's a combination of
both. I think I think he was both lucky
and smart. So um because a lot of people
who have this mutation who get standard
of care so here's the situation. If you
don't have the mutation you live about
15 months, 14 or 15 months. If you have
the mutation with standard of care you
can live 30 months. So you actually
increase by twice just because you have
that mutation. But the median survival
is 30 months instead of 15 months. Well,
Pablo was out 82 months now. It's all
he's going on very close to 84 months.
So
>> So he's he's still alive.
>> Oh, yeah. He's still alive. He's writing
a book on this now. And and uh the
reason why he is alive, he's avoided the
very therapies that would put him in the
grave faster. You one of the things
people should know, if you have a a t a
tumor, you should never irdiate
somebody's brain. It's it's insane. I
published a very clear uh article on
this. How radiation therapy by itself
frees up massive amounts of glucose and
glutamine in the tumor micro environment
facilitating the rapid recurrence and
demise of the patients. And as I said,
how beautifully consistent this survival
curve is in all hospitals and clinics
throughout the world says that if you
want to die quick, you do standard of
care. All right. Well, and I think it's
a, you know, I mean, we could do several
podcasts on the many problems with
cancer therapy and
>> yeah,
>> the failure of cancer therapy to
meaningfully increase survival rates.
And most I mean, there are a couple of
exceptions where
>> therapy is incredibly beneficial, but
for most cancers, it's little different
from doing nothing uh with a great deal
of pain and suffering and financial
>> disruption along the way. Well, that's
the whole thing. I mean, because cancer
in the in the community is viewed in the
in the scientific community in the
pharmaceutical industries as a genetic
disease. It's not a genetic disease.
It's a mitochondrial metabolic disease
dependent on glucose and glutamine for
survival. Okay. Once people understand
that, the the disease becomes much more
approachable and and and manageable
without
>> Okay. Now, we're getting down to the
crux of
>> Yeah.
>> Professor Dr. Seaff Freed's argument
here. Can you explain that? explain a
little bit about the Warberg effect and
when and by whom it was discovered and
what it means for cancer. I mean the
predominant hypothesis for decades has
been that cancer is the result of a
point uh mutation in the genome and
that's what causes the cell to go off
you know out of control and become a
cancerous cell. And there's reasons to
think that that's not the correct
causation for this, right? Obviously,
that's been the core of your research.
>> Yeah. Nothing could be further from the
truth than that than that idea. Nothing
can be further from the truth than the
idea that mutations cause cancer. They
don't. The nuclear transfer
mitochondrial transfer experiments
provide massive evidence that that these
mutations that disregulated cell growth
cannot be the result of point mutations
in the nucleus. I went through many many
experiments showing that if you move the
cancer nucleus into a new cytoplasm with
normal functional mitochondria, you
don't get cancer. And if you move a
normal nucleus into a into a cancer
cytoplasm, you get disregulated cell
growth. So the problem is people can't I
don't know if they can't understand it,
they don't believe it. I I it's just
beyond my comprehension why people can't
look at the data. We now know that uh
we're finding all these so-called driver
mutations. We're supposed to you have
different kinds of you have the
passenger mutations, the driver
mutations, all kinds of these friendly,
you know, all these crazy things. um now
we're
>> and and to be fair there are some driver
mutations like the p-53 mutation
get to at some point that are quite
common in cancers but
>> yes they are but they damage
mitochondria forcing the cell into a
warberg phenomenon
>> right okay so let's so let's skip that
>> okay but that's
>> sorry I I interjected there I shouldn't
have
>> no that's fine the the the questions are
always relevant and and important
because they're the same questions that
everybody asks
So uh um the issue here is the what you
said the Warberg effect is cells if you
if the cell loses it ability to generate
energy through oxidative phosphorilation
which is breathing. Let's breathe. Let's
get air energy from our breath or from
>> which is what the which is what the body
uses to convert fat and glucose the
fuels of the body into energy so that we
can live.
>> And the only one of the few cells that
does not do that are the ariththraittes
because they have neither mitochondria
nuclei right
>> the red blood cells. the red blood
cells. So they don't they they use small
tiny amounts of glucose uh to trans
transfer gases uh you know CO2 and
oxygen and things like this. So so
bottom line is all of our cells that
brain cells, heart cells, muscle cells,
kidney, liver, all the cells are using
oxidative phosphorilation in their
ability to do their uh genetically
programmed uh activities in in in our in
our body. So, and any any provocative
agent that could disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation,
exposure to chemical carcinogens,
radiation, intermittent hypoxia,
ankcoenic viruses, um uh uh uh inherited
risk factors like the leaf many p-53 as
you said, they all damage mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorilation. We all we
call all of these things cancer risk
factors. They put you at risk. Not
everybody who has p-53 develops a
cancer. Not everybody exposed to
tetrahydrochloride will develop a
cancer. They are risk factors. Okay? But
anyone who develops cancer from any one
of the risk factors, the cells are
fermenting. The cells are fermenting
because the risk factors have damaged
oxidative phosphorilation in a
population of cells in a particular
person's tissue. whatever that tissue
happens to be, breast, liver, lung,
whatever. So, so what happens then is
once the cell uh is has damaged
oxidative phosphorilation, they signal
to the nucleus to turn on transporters
for glucose and glutamine which serve as
alternative fuels to maintain ATP
synthesis and metabolites for growth.
Okay. So just quickly there, glutamine
is an amino acid that is converted into
glucose by the body or is it as a fuel
source?
>> No, no, no. Glutamine generates energy
through mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation in the TCA cycle through
the glutaminolysis pathway.
>> Okay. So it's used independently as a
fuel source
>> independent. In fact, it's used as the
primary fuel source. There is no other
major fuel source other than glutamine
for the cell.
>> Okay. For cancer or all cells?
>> No, no, for cancer. predominantly for
cancer and also for our immune system
and also for our gut. So some cells in
the gut will use glutamine and some
cells of our immune system which is very
very important David because we have
defined metastatic cancer as a part of
our immune system. It's a macroofage or
a fusion hybrid of a macrofage which is
a a major glutamine hog glutamine use.
So all metastatic cancers are going to
be heavily dependent on glutamine. Okay?
Because they arrive from a bi a cell
with the biology that needs glutamine.
All right.
>> Do cancers take glutamine as a fuel
source before they become metastatic?
>> Um, it's in the it's it's it's in the
process so uh of becoming metastatic.
Okay. So we have stem cells that are
rapidly proliferating that can be
considered a tumorogenic neoplastic cell
but they don't have the biology
capability of invading or survival in
the in the in the those cells will take
in a lot of glucose and some glutamine.
But the cell that becomes metastatic is
heavily dependent on both glucose and
glutamine. Again fact we can't find any
cancer cell that doesn't that can
survive without glut glucose and
glutamine. We have tested all these
things. We can't find any cancer cells
so far that can survive without glucose
and glutamine. That's already neoplastic
and metastatic. Okay. So, those are
>> Okay. Well, let's let's not get too I
mean, this is a key point here for
folks, but let's I don't want to totally
get off on your your key argument here.
>> Yeah. Okay. So I mean the the important
issue here is that now uh in order to
transform into a disregulated a cell
with disregulated growth the cell
transitions from oxidative
phosphorilation to substrate level
phosphorilation and substrate level
phosphorilation occurs in the glycolysis
pathway also referred to the war as the
Warberg effect and in the glutaminolysis
pathway
>> which is considered to be a more
primitive means of generating power. I
mean that's what yeast do in uh any cell
without mitochondria like red blood
cells as you mentioned.
>> Well, red blood cells don't have a they
can't divide. So you have to have a cell
that has a nucleus that has the
capability of division,
>> right? But they use they use glycolysis
to generate power, not mitochondria,
which they're lacking.
>> Yeah. And they don't use glutamine
because there's no mitochondria in
there. Okay. So they don't use Okay. You
have to have a mitochondria to use
glutamine.
>> Okay. So cancer cells still have
somewhat functional mitochondria.
>> Uh not oxidative phosphorilation,
substrate level phosphorilation.
>> I see. Okay.
>> Okay. So there's two two major sources
of energy that comes out of the
mitochondria. One is through oxidative
phosphorilation which is the vast amount
of energy and the other
>> which would be gl which would be typical
glucose and fatty acid oxidation.
>> Yes. all those that's the typical
everything is broken down to acetil coa
and then you can you know de develop
reducing equivalents NADPH and this kind
of thing and that what you can do is is
develop a a powerful proton motive
gradient that allows the F1F0 ATPAS to
synthesize energy with a very high
efficiency and and that's coming from
the the the Krebs TCA cycle producing
reducing equivalents and having a a
proton force that allows that pump to
that that energy to be generated quite
quite effectively. So what happens now
don't forget the single largest consumer
of energy in a cell is the membrane
pumps. I call them dumbass pumps. I
these cells without pumps man uh you get
uh shifts in sodium potassium the cells
will either shrink or swell and blow up.
It's it's without energy to the pump you
reach equilibrium and death. Okay, they
are the major consumers of ATP in any
cell is the pump. Neurons, gal cells,
liver cells, whatever it is, you have to
have those pumps working and the major
source of ATP goes to maintain these
pumps. If these pumps don't work, you
die.
>> So,
>> you wrote a fantastic paper last year on
the origin of ATP synthesis and cancer
where you discussed that mechanism that
was
>> Yeah.
>> quite quite educational and interesting.
>> Yeah. And uh people forget that you know
you got if you don't maintain ATP
synthesis the pumps will fail and the
cell will die. So so that where the ATP
comes from if if oxos becomes damaged.
Now if oxos becomes damaged too acutely
the cell will die just like you know you
take cyanide cell dies. Why you take die
from cyanide is because you shut down
oxidative phosphorilation instantly and
the cells all go into equilibrium and
you die very quickly from cyanide.
>> True. And that's an that's I've used
that uh analogy myself in the past
because what cyanide does specifically
is it breaks down the electron transport
chain which is the mechanism by which
the cell produces ATP but it's not the
only way in which one can break down the
electron transport chain and that's
often what one sees in cancer it seems
is that that pathway becomes damaged and
the cell goes looking for other ways to
stay alive. Well, this is an
evolutionarily conserved process. Um,
it's the chronic uh interruption of
oxidative phosphorilation which allows
the ankco genes to upregulate
transporters
that allow these fermentable fuels now
to come into the cell. So eventually
fermentation replaces respiration in the
ability of the cell to grow and uh uh to
divide and survive. And these are the
same pathways that existed before oxygen
came into the atmosphere some 2.5
billion years ago. So these cancer cells
are simply falling back on ancient
pathways. And as Albert um Senorgi said
that all cells during the alpha period
of life existence on the planet were all
fermentors and they would ferment divide
like crazy until fermentable fuels were
depleted in the environment and then
they would die. So cancer is simply
falling back in into a into the alpha
period when oxygen was not available on
the uh in the atmosphere because cancer
cells are can grow well in hypoxia and
they can grow well in cyanide. So
>> right
>> you know so clearly uh you know you're
dealing with cells that have fallen back
on ancient pathways but what the fuel to
so you need fuel. What was the fuel
then? It was fermentable fuels and and
the fermentable fuels that we have in
our body today are glucose and
glutamine. There are no other fuels that
can be fermented. Ketones cannot be
fermented. Fatty acids cannot be
fermented. Other amino acids uh you the
body requires the cell requires
significant energy to reconfigure the
backbone of other amino acids to get
into that um glutaminolysis pathway. So
it's a it's a a wasted game. It's like a
vicious cycle. You're not going to get
any energy from that.
>> I've heard so I've heard that that
ketone someone said ketones can fuel
cancer cells in some cases. Is that true
or is there anything about that?
>> You know um you know and zombies are
alive too and they walk around. You know
this is I put that in the zombie
category. You know the no ketones cannot
fuel if you if you take away glucose and
glutamine and give the cells ketones
they croak. They can't use ketone
bodies. you're saying but that's I mean
that this is another important point to
make is that cells don't typically use a
single fuel source they're using a
combination of fuel sources in parallel
right I mean this is why when you
>> well everything is acetil coa I mean
you're going to get acetil
>> exact exactly so
>> cancer cancer cells may not be able to
use ketones alone but there are
different cancer cells that use
different blends of fuels your claim
>> no what blend
Well, okay. So,
might
>> as well get into this now. We had Dr.
Lanti
>> on a couple of weeks ago, who's the
proponent to what he calls the reverse
Warberg hypothesis, which I will say
upfront I don't think is in any way in
uh opposition to your point of view and
which he seemed to agree. Um, but he's
looking at metastatic cells where
they're more capable of producing
power from oxidative phosphorilation.
And his proposed therapy for treating
those cells and preventing metastasis is
by essentially breaking the mitochondria
and, you know, putting them into a state
where they're unable to produce enough
power to met metastasize through the
body. So maybe you could I didn't mean
to jump too far ahead, but you know that
maybe you could address his hypothesis.
>> Well, his his hypothesis is inconsistent
with evolutionary biology and
>> although he he didn't disagree with you
that most tumor cells are getting power
the way you described.
>> Here's the situation.
The reverse Warberg effect in his in his
view is that the fiberblasts in the
cancer micro environment are fermenting
and they provide fermentable fuels. Um
they provide lactic acid to the cancer
cell which then uses it for oxidative
phosphorilation.
Does that make sense?
In in any in any conceivable way does
that make sense? Okay. you you
>> well I mean the heart uses lactic acid
for oxidative phosphorilation so it
doesn't make a certain amount of sense
>> heart heart can have a heart cells have
normal mitochondrial function and when
heart cells are put under uh uh
oxidative stress they they ferment um
they begin to ferment and they also use
the glutaminolysis pathway they get
energy from substrate level
phosphorilation very similar to the way
the cancer cell does the problem with
the heart it can only do that for a
short period of time before the cells
will die. So, so, so this is a very
important point. So, let's think about
Lanti's argument for a minute. So, uh
other cells not can cancer cells are not
fermenting uh the other cells in the
environment are fermenting. So, how is
it if cancer cells are not fermenting
and they live in hypoxia and uh and I
mean very low oxygen levels lower than
0.5%
and they live in cyanide. Well, they're
definitely not able to do oxidative
phosphorilation. But what's more
important in structural biology, in
evolutionary biology, we know from the
earliest parts of studying the field
that structure determines function. This
is an evolutionarily uh embodied
principle. Structure determines
function. Okay. So, the mitochondria
structure is essential for the normal
function of that organel. In the eye
science paper that you read uh origin of
ATP synthesis I went through all of the
major cancers that we know of all of the
90 over 90% of all cancers have
abnormalities in the number structure
and function of mitochondria. Okay.
Those
>> which is which is by the way I think
your most foundational point for anybody
trying to understand this.
>> Yeah. Because it's based on on on
evolutionary biology. I mean nothing in
our field makes sense except in the
light of evolution. And when you and and
and when you understand evolutionary
biology, any new therapy or idea that
you have should be linked to the general
principles and concepts of the field.
Okay. Lanti's argument is completely
unrelated and not linked to evolutionary
biology. So he is assuming that the
cancer cells with defective mitochondria
that that that can live in hypoxia and
that can live in cyanide are perfectly
normal.
>> Well, no I
>> Yeah, he said I mean you know okay they
have normal oxide.
>> Let me parap let me paraphrase his
argument for him. Um my apologies to him
for doing this.
>> Believe me, I know his argument. His his
point as I understood it was that you're
correct about most of the cells in the
cancer tumors, but the cells that seem
to be an exception to the rule are the
metastatic cells, the cells that travel
to other parts of the body and spread
the cancer around. So his argument was
if you break the mitochondria in those
cells, then you can give yourself the
time to treat the rest of the cancer
before it metastasizes and kills the
patient. those.
>> But he seemed he he seemed
to agree with your basic premise that
you know this is only
>> if you want the exception that proves
the rule of cancer is how I interpreted
what he said.
>> Yeah.
>> But I don't I don't I don't want to
completely disrupt you.
>> No. No.
>> From your
>> believe me I I know his I know his
hypothesis and I know I know what he's
saying. The reverse you want to reverse
the Warberg effect. You put new
mitochondria into the cell. It reverses.
they they return to an oxidative
phosphorilation status. Okay, so that's
a crucial point because what that
suggests is that it's a defect in
mitochondrial regulation
>> ox
>> that is happening right because I mean
the mitochondria are supposed to work in
concert with the cell
>> and when the mitochondria break they're
supposed to induce apoptosis which is a
controlled form of cell death right
which is one of the things that doesn't
happen correctly in a cancer cell it
goes rogue when it gets the signal to
die. It says, "No thanks. I'm going to
have a happy life
regardless of what you're telling me to
do."
>> Yeah. Well, the the apotic signal, as
you know, is controlled by mitochondria,
>> right?
>> Mitochondria are the kill switch for the
cell. When something goes wrong and
mitochondria stop function, they they
immediately undergo an apotic pathway.
So, they don't prevent so they don't
form cancer cells, right? But
>> or they Right. Exactly. They're supposed
to.
>> Yeah. They're supposed to. So when the
kill switch is broken, the cell bypasses
apoptosis and enters into a fermentation
metabolism which existed before
mitochondria came into the cell. So so
um you're falling back on ancient
metabolic pathways that are o overriding
the entire energy metabolism in the cell
and the only thing the cell will do then
enters it default state. The work of uh
Carlos Sonenshin and Anos Anisoto down
here at Tus University have elegantly
provided the evolutionary concepts of
the default state and the quiescent
state of of metazzoan cells which which
is part of our body. So the quiescent
state is is the state of of no division.
It's quscent. And when cells lose active
control over their biology, they fall
back on the default state which is
proliferation. And the mitochondria are
maintaining the quiescent state. They
are the active control system of
>> now is that is that what's also called
scinessence, cellular scinessence.
>> Well, scinessence is a different issue.
That's when the cell begins to enter
into an aging process and becomes
dysfunctional in in due to due to aging
and and various other disruptive uh
forces that way. Um but but the con the
evolutionary concept of quiescence
versus the def the the the quiescent
state the default state what is the
default state of metazone cells and it
is proliferation. Well, what prevents
proliferation is an active control
system. And the active control system is
functional oxidative phosphorilation,
functional mitochondria. So when when
the when the cell loses that capability
gradually, not acutely, gradually. So
the ankco genes are facilitators of
transitioning the cell from oxos to
fermentation. So because if you are
using a less efficient energy source
which is fermentable fuels you have to
open up the floodgates for glucose and
glutamine to come in to replace the
energy from oxidative phosphorilation
and that's controlled by one alpha these
these ankco genes that you hear about
Mick MC HIF these are
>> and an enco genes just again to bring it
down to earth is a gene that's thought
to promote cancer
Well, it's a facilitator of the
>> fermentation facilitator. Okay.
>> Yeah, they're facilitators and you can
turn them if you put new mitochondria
back into the cell, the ankco genes turn
off. The the ankco genes are no longer
necessary because the cell is making
normal energy. So when you go into a
fermentation metabolism, you have to
open the floodgates for fermentable
fuels because ferment fermentation is so
much less efficient than oxidative
phosphorilation. In order to run the
fermentation energy, you have to have an
abundance of fuels that can be used to
produce ATP for this cell. And that's
controlled by ankco genes. And they turn
on the glucose transporters, the
glutamine transporters, and the pathways
that will allow those fuels to generate
ATP and metabolites for growth. So the
glucose is providing en uh not energy
it's providing the carbons for rapid
synthesis of lipids and proteins and
nucleic acids and the glutamine nitrogen
is allowing cells to use it for protein
and nucleic acid synthesis. But the
energy the energy is coming from
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation an ancient pathway that
is independent of oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria.
>> Right. Right. So again as I put it in my
vulgar way they're going rogue and
they're ignoring the you should stop
working.
>> Yeah. No that's true. And we call
metastasis metastatic behavior is rogue
macrofasages. Now the metastatic cell is
absolutely required for glutamine to
generate the energy. So uh the glutamine
is being used by our immune cells. All
right? So macrofasages, lymphosytes,
killer cells and all these immune cells
are very big glutamine hogs and they
need the glutamine. So the metastatic
cell is one of these kinds of cells.
It's already a macro, it's a macrofage
fused with another cell or a macrofage
that's locked into a fermentation
metabolism.
>> And of course, one of the one of the key
attributes of the macrofasages is that
they're able to move about the body
unlike a typical cell that's anchored in
place
>> and they're they're fagocitic and
they're also powerful uh
immunosuppressors.
So the whole concept of imunotherapies
that people talk about PDL1, PD1 or
CARTT imunotherapy, that stuff is never
going to work. That stuff is already
dead in the water because the very
cancer cells you're trying to target and
kill are largely imunosuppressive. Now,
every every now and then the squirrel
finds the nut and one of these uh PDL1
inhibitors will do a little bit of good,
but a lot of people are dying from these
things and they cause all kinds of other
so and they're ba they're based on the
cancer being a genetic disease. If
cancer is not a genetic disease, why are
you wasting your time with
imunotherapies? Why are you wasting your
time with toxic chemotherapies? Why are
you wasting your time with radiation
therapy? The cells can't live without
glucose and glutamine period. So if you
target some and this was with our new
paper the paper that came out described
a novel mechanism by which this young
man is surviving so long because he has
a therapeutic mutation that's
interrupting the glycolysis and
glutaminolysis pathways and a diet
therapy that's lowering blood sugar and
elevating ketone bodies and the ketone
bodies are simply making his body
healthier. the delta
>> right now one key point for the audience
here when you say it's an alternative
therapy
uh
by my understanding and this is from a
gentleman by the name of Colin Champ
who's an MD and oncologist
he noted that the ketogenic diet is in
fact the most studied diet for efficacy
in cancer of any of the diets that are
prescribed to cancer patients and
essentially every time you go see an
oncologist, he's telling you, you know,
okay, this is how you should proceed.
And when you're in for treatment,
they're going to give you a diet, which
unfortunately doesn't have much evidence
for efficacy when you're in the
hospital. They're not typically going to
give you a ketogenic diet, despite the
research that's been put into showing
its efficacy for certain situations in
cancer.
>> Yeah, he's right. He's right about that.
They don't want to touch this uh
metabolic therapy with a 10-ft pole even
though you have massive hard
biochemistry to say why it works the
mechanisms why it works and how it
should work. Now what what they're doing
in in the clinic at least for
glyobblasto is they're taking the
patients and giving them standard of
care radiation and poisonous chemicals
uh ma dexamethasone and then when the
patients tumor comes roaring back then
they say well maybe now we should do
some ketogenic metabolic therapy. What
do you
>> which is the same which is the same
thing they do in epilepsy. Yeah,
>> they only use the treat they only use
the diet treatment when everything else
has failed rather than as the first line
to pass.
>> I have I I worked in the epilepsy field
for decades and I have a lot of friends
who are really ripped about that. Even
the group at John's Hopkins wants to use
ketogenic metabolic therapy as a first
line for epilepsy also. But again, the
pharmaceutical the big hand of the
pharmaceutical companies are very very
powerful and they control what goes on
in these medical schools. So if you if
you try to take off the big hand uh you
you're going to have financial hell to
pay.
>> So which
>> Dr. Safreed I want to ask. So does that
>> is there any scientific reason why
they're not introducing the metabolic
therapy as a front line for things like
epilepsy and cancer? Is there any valid
scientific reason before you get into
the financial or economic or political
hand that you just referred to?
>> Yeah. Well, that's you know that's part
of reality. There's no uh logical uh u
reason uh based on scientific evidence
why the ke the meta ketogenic metabolic
therapy should not be a firstline uh
treatment. There is no uh and if people
say well it doesn't work that or they
say oh if it were so important we would
have had clinical trials. Well who's
going to pay for the clinical trial? And
when they
>> but also the the evidence for ketogenic
diet efficacy in epilepsy goes back a
hundred years. It's not like this is
even a remotely controversial treatment
for this.
>> No, but here here's the one thing,
Tucker, you're going to love this.
You are 100% correct. The ketogenic diet
works and it works really well. What
what we don't know is the mechanism by
which the ketogenic diet stops epileptic
seizures. which which which to be fair
>> there are lots of medicines out there
that work like metformin the most
commonly prescribed medicine I'm aware
of
>> and we don't know the mechanism for that
so saying we don't know the mechanism
isn't a valid reason not to try a
therapy
>> no no I agree with that 100% but it's
even in in glyobblastoman cancer not
only does the ketogenic metabolic
therapy work we absolutely understand
the mechanism by which it works right
>> so there's the difference we have a
clear un unambiguous
knowledge about how ketogenic metabolic
therapy stops the growth of cancer not
cure because the ketogenic metabolic
therapy predominantly targets the
glycolysis pathway more than the
glutaminolysis
pathway and I pointed that out in the in
the paper on on this patient who's
living so long so either you get the
IDH1 mutation which really now targets
It's the glutaminolysis pathway
pulling away the fuel. Or you can use
glutamine targeting drugs. And this is
what we published. We showed that if you
use ketogenic metabolic therapy together
with glutamine targeting drugs, you can
significantly increase progression free
and overall survival in both in both
preclinical models as well as in human
subjects. Now uh the mechanism by which
that works is crystal clear. The cells
need glucose and they need glutamine
through the glycolysis and
glutaminolysis pathways. If you starve
the cell of the upstream fuels for each
pathway, you will not generate the uh
carbons for for metabolite growth nor
the ATP needed. So the cell has to have
a source of metabolites for growth and
it has to have a source of energy. And
when you cut off the energy and the
metabolites and transition the body to
ketones which all the uh quiescent cells
can use as a fuel then you you enhance
the health and vitality of the normal
cells of the body while you starve and
shut off the metabolites and energy for
the cancer cell without the toxicity
associated with all the other therapies
that people are being exposed to. It's
an elegant uh it's it's a simple elegant
non-toxic way to kill cancer all kinds
of cancers not just glyobblasto because
as I have shown every cancer has the
same problem now
>> now can can you get into that a little
bit because my one of my particular
interests since I'm a strange fellow is
the role of cardioipin in the cell and
cardioipin damage and the downstream
effects of that and I know that you've
done some research into cardioipin being
>> can you explain that cardiolipin what
that is for folks? Yeah, I can explain
it because I it's a it's a beautiful uh
elegant lipid in the inner membrane of
the mitochondria predominantly. You
know, I'll tell you it's a very
interesting it's
>> a fat
>> it's a fat. It's a phosphoipid. It's a
it's a fatty acid. It's a phosphoipid
attached to four fatty acids and the
fatty acids are embedded in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria. So the
proteins of the electron transport chain
which ultimately is responsible for the
majority of energy in a cell are
intimately associated with the fatty
acids and the phospholipid head group of
these of these fatty acids in the
membrane because don't forget a membrane
is composed of of lipids and and
proteins. So it's a it's a it forms a
billayer and you have all kinds of nice
proteins and lipids and things in these
billayers. You know it's a very
interesting thing. Um if if you look at
the uh the structure of some of these
proteins of the electron transport chain
needed for oxidative phosphorilation,
they have these beautiful grooves like
um like between your fingers you have
these nice grooves and and uh the the
fatty acid chains of the cardipin fit
beautifully into the grooves on these on
these uh proteins. So these proteins
evolve to have an intimate interaction
with cardiolippin and that makes the
proteins work remarkably well. They
cluster and and when you have we have
found no cancer cell yet that has a
normal content or composition of
cardioipin that means that lipid
abnormality is going to have a
significant effect on how the proteins
of electron transport chain work. And
furthermore, cardiolipin is the oxidized
cardioipib is the signal for the cell to
undergo apoptosis.
>> Exactly. Uh and but if it if it is
shifted over to fermentation, that that
doesn't work anymore. So uh so the cell
bypasses the apotic signaling system by
that by that mechanism.
>> So what's causing the dis the
dysfunctional cardipin in the cell?
>> Thank you, David. Well, that that can
that that can come from carcinogens,
that can come from radiation, that can
come from intermittent hypoxia. All all
of these things can cause uh uh reactive
oxygen species and cardioins are heavily
polyunsaturated. So that they get uh
when we looked at the cancer cells,
interestingly enough, they were all
saturated. They they had so many
saturation
in the in the conversion to a
fermentation metabolism. So clearly
they're not they're not helping out
really much in this. They're they're
they're now become part of the problem
rather than the solution. But but you're
absolutely right. If you have good
healthy cells uh in our bodies that are
that are not damaged um then they will
be polyunsaturated and they'll be
working intimately with the proteins of
the electron transport chain. So any of
those what I call provoc um what we call
the provocative agents that can cause
cancer chemical carcinogens. What
happens to chemical carcinogen? They
actually get into the mitochondria and
they they're bright like little phospho
phosphorescents inside the mitochondria
forming reactive oxygen species that
damage significantly the cardipin which
is going to impair significantly the
ability of the cell to generate
oxidative phosphorilation. So you know
you can have uh rare inherited mutations
that create damage to reactive oxygen
species further damaging cardioipin.
cardipin will become damaged along with
the proteins of the electron transport
chain.
>> Have have you looked at the interaction
between bar syndrome and cancer at all?
I'm not aware of any relationship. I'm
just curious.
>> Yeah. Well, very interesting because bar
syndrome has in inherited defects of
cardipin and uh you would say whoa you
should have more tumors in bar syndrome
right but the problem with bar syndrome
for whatever reason blood sugar levels
are extremely low. We don't understand
it. You can't get cancer if your blood
sugars are too low. You can't drive You
can't drive the beast.
>> Interesting. So, people with Bar
syndrome have less cancer.
>> Yeah, though they die sooner.
>> They Well, yes. I mean, there are other
problems with it, but
>> Yeah, but they they die.
>> Is that a rare? Is that a rare disease
or what is it?
>> Yeah, it's a
>> Yeah, it's it's fairly rare. I mean,
like most genetic diseases that are
going to kill you, they're pretty rare
because people don't survive to pass
them on. It's an inborn inborn error of
metabolism of heart of cardio cardiac
function and it's based on a failure to
remodel cardipin causing mitochondrial
dysfunction. But but at the same time
for reasons which we don't understand
blood sugar is very low and you can't
really generate much of a of a
proliferating cancer cell if you don't
have blood sugar available. And that's
also
>> couldn't couldn't that be because the
mitochondria are involved in
gluconioenesis in the liver and if
they're nonfunctional there they're not
going to produce enough.
>> Yeah, I think there's probably it's
probably a whole constellation of
different interactions that are
responsible.
>> That's that's definitely off topic here.
Although
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, that I I
but what is but what is interesting uh
is the fact that people with Alzheimer's
disease have a lower risk for cancer
than people that don't have Alzheimer's
disease. and and um al Alzheimer's
disease is associated with very low
blood sugar levels uh and they you know
insulin and and and you can't you can't
generate neoplasia those rapidly growing
cells without the fermentable fuel. So
if the fermentable fuels are missing um
or very low, you're simply you simply
don't have enough energy control uh
glucose transporters on the surface of
the neurons are very low in and and gal
cells uh not only the gal cells also
they have the glucose transporters are
very low. So you're you're not going to
be able to because NIH said a
provocative question why al why cancer
is so low in al people with Alzheimer's
disease mainly because they can't get
the fermentable fuel into the cell.
>> But that's fascinating because there are
similarities between Alzheimer's and
cancer. I mean in a broad sense. Yes.
>> Notably dysfunctional ATP production.
>> Yes. And uh it's called um I don't know
they call it it's a metabolic
Alzheimer's is another metabolic disease
you know uh in fact ketogenic diets are
being used as a therapy if if you can if
you can delay
>> because because Alzheimer's brain cells
have dysfunctional ability to process
glucose as a fuel but they can fall back
and use ketones just fine.
>> Yes. Yes. Exactly. So um so when you
start to look at it most of the diseases
not just cancer if you have type two
diabetes Alzheimer's disease
cardiovascular disease macular
degeneration any of these things are all
the result of defects in energy
metabolism in one way or another. So
that
>> yes that's that's exactly a point that I
like to make to people is that they all
share this common element of
mitochondrial dysfunction and if we can
figure out
>> what's causing that in my opinion likely
through something like cardipin then we
go a long way towards being able to
>> prevent them if not necessarily treat
them.
>> Yeah. Well I think uh if your if your
body is in therapeutic ketosis uh
cardipin will be protected. You do not
generate reactive oxygen species when
you burn ketones. Richard Vech at the
NIH, a good friend of mine who passed
away earlier this year. Uh we he and I
were talking
>> he was an amazing he was an amazing
scientist and it should be noted was a
student of Krebs who you've mentioned uh
referring to the Kreb cycle which is a
foundational uh discovery in uh
metabolism science. So when when you
burn ketones, you actually increase the
efficiency of energy production in the
mitochondria without the production of
reactive oxygen species.
>> Yes. He referred to Vich referred to it
as a super fuel.
>> Super fuel. Exactly. So uh because you
get a you get a a more um a steeper
proton motive gradient. So you can make
more more ATP
more efficiently burning a ketone than
you can burning glucose or fatty acids.
And um and and therefore when you put
the patients into therapeutic ketosis,
you're actually enhancing the energy
efficiency of all other cells. But the
cancer cell cannot burn ketones because
it has a defective oxidative
phosphorilation system.
>> Broken mitochondria. broken the oxfos
system. You need good oxfos to burn
ketones. You can't burn fatty acids. Now
what fatty acids can do is they can
facilitate the use of glucose and
glutamine. So there are a number of
scientific papers in the literature
saying fat cancer cells fatty acids
facilitate cancer growth and in some
cases they can by stimulating the use of
glucose and glutamine. So um but it's
not directly burning fatty acids. It's
making fatty acids ferment giving the
cancer cell more fermentation. So
indirect fermentation from caused by
fatty acids. So once listen Tucker
>> and David sir
listen once you understand the biology
of the disease and the chemistry behind
it. All of this stuff is so easy to
explain. It's it's just so clear. And
evidence is Pablo Kelly is evidence for
that. The mice that we treated that live
so much longer than any other mice
without chemo radiation is proof of
principle that we are on the right track
for the management of cancer using very
simple approaches that are non-toxic and
it it just so what is the impediment the
like David you're asking what is the
impediment to doing this because of the
lockedin view that cancer is a genetic
disease almost like a a religion it's
like a dogma it's a silent assumption
and the fact that no one no one has yet
found out how to make money on this.
Well, and that's a, you know, look,
having been there myself for the
audience here, I want to observe that
some of the things that you've said like
that um may come across to some folks as
sounding like a conspiracy
>> theory, but but I am going to observe
that there are lots of things in
medicine that defy rational uh
explanation. For instance, the refusal
to use diet as a firstline treatment for
epilepsy over the last 100 years.
>> I mean,
>> the, you know, the therapy was abandoned
by the medical profession
>> and it was only brought back into common
use by the Charlie Foundation. I can't
remember the
>> name of the Hollywood producer whose son
Charlie was, but
>> yeah, Jim Abrams, he's he's a friend of
mine. Jim
>> Jim Abrams. So Jim Abrams son was
epileptic and somehow he discovered this
therapy and brought it back into
mainstream use over the
>> kicking and screaming of the neurology
profession which is inexplicable
you know so what what I just want to
point out to all the people listening
here
>> this is not a conspiracy theory there is
good evidence that this happens in
medicine and it's hard to explain why it
happens but it most certainly does and
it's something that we all need to be
aware of when we're undergoing treatment
for a condition like this.
>> Well, then I would think that, you know,
getting, you know, conspiracy theories
everybody always talks about. Well, then
the Kreb cycle must be a conspiracy
theory in science
>> and the Randall cycle and Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> the whole all of cellular biology is a
conspiracy theory.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Right. you know, you you'd
have to go to that that craziness. And
uh uh you know, the the issue here, as
I've said, you know, the the
heliocentric geocentric theory of the
solar system,
>> you know, um the the geocentric theory
was embraced by the by the Catholic
Church and and by TMI uh and lasted for
centuries before Galileo, Capernicus,
and Kepler came along to to debunk that,
you know. Um the the Lewis Pastor germ
theory replaced the miasma theory, bad
air theory of of Galen and Hypocrates
and
>> and it drove and it drove the poor
doctor who was trying to promote washing
your hands Yeah. insane because none of
his colleagues would listen to him.
>> Well, heeded Yeah. He preceded the germ
theory and they just couldn't link it to
anything.
>> So
>> Well, yes, you know Seml Weiss, right?
That's exactly right.
>> Yeah. So I you know I I I my my good
friend Christos works at Seml Weiss
University today in Budapest. So I work
with the guy who who whose name who's at
the university whose name was made for
that. But it it's my view and I'm
writing a big paper on this. um the
mitochondrial metabolic theory will
replace the gene theory with the impact
that no different from these other
transformations and maybe even as as
equally important because because what
we're dealing with today Tucker as you
know and David we got 1 1600 people a
day dying from cancer over 1600 people a
day and and um this is going on year in
and year out year in and year out and
it's starting to overtake heart disease
as the number one killer of people and
they're suffering immensely from the
treatments and the procedures that they
are being given to try to manage their
disease. And by the grace of God, those
who do in fact survive the cancer
treatments are afflicted with all kinds
of other malades for the fact that they
were poisoned or irdiated with toxic
treatments that reflect now on other
parts of the physiology of their
existence. Which is which is which is a
key point because much of cancer
treatment nowadays is poisoning you.
>> Yeah.
>> Enough so that hopefully the cancer dies
before you do.
>> Yes. Yes. So why do that when we all we
have to do is pull the plug on the
glucose and glutamine.
>> It's very dark ages in comparison to
what you're suggesting. Yeah.
>> Yes. It's it's it's no different than
the than the people believing that the
earth is the center of the solar system.
I mean the the the issue here is that um
I think we can easily stop uh so I was
talking to physicians and they said well
we're not trained it's none of the
medical schools are training physicians
in metabolic therapy diet nutrition
metabolic therapy they're not being
trained in this so so the very people
that you need to implement the very
therapies that will reduce the disease
are not there
>> are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer. So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rocker, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safereed's work. Dive
into the science and discoveries. These
summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereaded's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker Meyer has already
made at www ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives.
Well, which is which is, you know, in my
opinion,
an absurd argument because physicians
run medical schools. No one else does.
No one tells them what to teach except
the college of physicians.
>> Yeah. But the college
>> if they wanted to change this the, you
know, the curricula at medical schools,
they could. they could, but the
pharmaceutical companies unfortunately
dictate much of the curriculum that goes
on because these guys got to be pushing
pharmacy a lot,
>> right?
>> And um you know, so it's all revenue
when you go behind the scenes. Uh it's
revenue generation and I I I feel that
there will be entrepreneurs that will
come uh that will be able to figure out
how metabolic therapy can be brought in
line with revenue generation.
>> Okay. And and there are such
entrepreneurs. I mean Sammy Verda or
Sammy Incanin and Verda with uh
>> they are rewriting the book on how to
treat diabetes. Diabetes is highly
associated with most cancers. Are you
working with them on starting to look at
how the cancer incidence
>> Oh yeah.
>> looks in their patient group because
they are prescribing a ketogenic diet
for diabetes. I I think that you'll
significantly reduce risk for cancer. I
know I know Steve Finny and and and Jeff
Folic, the guys who are running that
that that whole program there. And uh
they they just, you know, it's it works.
Uh you know, ketogenic diet, metabolic
therapy, or water only therapeutic
fasting will cure type two diabetes. I
mean, this has been shown over and over
again. The problem is most people would
rather take a a metformin tablet rather
than do right than do everything else.
But um but you're absolutely correct.
It's diet and lifestyle changes that um
and I also talk about you know the in
the papers the when you say diet cancer
and diet and lifestyle and genetics you
know as I said the chimpanzeee is so 98%
similar to us in genes and protein
sequences and cancer is extremely rare
in chimps um
>> but non-existent
>> but even more than that cancer is
extremely rare in uh call them primitive
yes
>> human societies like hunter gatherers I
mean cancer
You know, there are cancers that, you
know, like the Epstein bar virus causes
cancer and that's been around for a long
time. But, right,
>> the cancers that we now call,
>> you know, in Japan, they refer to them
as the Western cancers.
>> Yeah.
>> Those are rare in a lot in primitive
populations or populations that haven't
adopted this what, you know, what we
call the standard American diet. And
that's a rather crucial point that,
>> you know, isn't advertised well enough,
right? that the likely reason all of
these diseases exist in the first place
is because of our diet.
>> So, it's hardly irrational to look at
diet as a way to treat them.
>> No, you're absolutely right. And and um
but here's the situation. Thomas Eddi
and Boglestein
uh from John's Hopkins published a major
paper in science showing that the
incidence of cancer was related to the
how the the replic how many DNA
replications existed in a particular
organ like liver, breast, colon. They
were able to show that it was all the it
was called bad luck that you would have
you have the bad luck paper. Remember it
was it was uh massively seen throughout
the entire cancer called bad luck theory
that you just get bad luck you have so
many DNA well the chimpanzeee has just
as many similar DNA replication never
gets cancer completely
>> and so do the so do the simane people
down in Bolivia.
>> Yes.
>> So they're no different than us. My
question that I want to focus on is what
is driving the epidemic in cancer? Is it
the is it the sugar increase? Doc Tucker
Goodrich says I think you would say it's
it's primarily these vegetable oils that
people were eating in western diets.
What is So obviously we know that sugar
and glutamine are feeding the cancer
once it started. But what's actually
causing this
>> uh uh this surge in things, you know,
that seems to be the big who done it
that we need to figure out to prevent
it,
>> you know? Well, in my mind, the diet uh
incorrect diet and risky lifestyle is
probably the uh origin of the majority
of cancers. Um and that if that's
various oils or high high fructose corn
syrup or uh
>> and obviously things like smoking and
alcohol.
>> Yeah. You know,
>> which are indisputably bad for you.
>> But people were smoking and drinking
alcohol thousands of years ago. They
didn't have cancer rates like we have
today from what
>> Yeah. There are there are definitely
other factors. No question about that.
>> So, what's the big what's the big
elephant in the room? See, I want to I'm
I'm trying Tucker keeps saying it's the
vegetable oils. I want to see if there's
any evidence that you see that could be
the driver. That's what I'm trying to
get at.
>> Well, I think some vegetable oils what
they do is they increase inflammation
and
>> inflammation can be a risk factor for
the development of cancer. So there's a
good body of evidence that the
mitochondrial dysfunction that you see
related to the cardipin is specifically
caused by the increase in linoleic acid
from seed oil consumption.
>> Yeah. I mean well certainly that I mean
I'm I'm not going to argue with you on
that point.
>> Well I'm I'm I'm just you know I wasn't
going to bring this up but David
mentioned it so that's you know
>> I mean I I have no no u uh you know that
sounds to me reasonable. So, uh,
anything that would interfere with
oxidative phosphorilation. But, but
>> but the reason why I think it's
important from our listeners, because a
lot of folks are saying, think, wait a
second. So, is it because I'm eating 100
carbs of sugar a day? Is that what's
going to cause me to have cancer? A lot
of people think that way in the low carb
or keto space. And I don't think that's
necessarily the case. That's what I want
to get at. It may be a contributing
factor once you've destroyed the body
with another factor perhaps. Right. Is
that what we're
>> although although we have to keep in
mind that this may be out of the scope
of Dr. Safe Freed's research I he's
looking he's you're focusing am I
correct on how to treat this not
necessarily what's caused it from an
anthropological perspective. No, no, we
look at all aspects. The problem is most
people u kind of not that interested in
prevention. Um, you know, how do you
prevent cancer? If you're if
mitochondrial damage is the origin of
cancer with a with a compensatory
fermentation, then how do you prevent
mitochondrial damage in your life? And
the way to do that is to remain in
therapeutic ketosis. Our ancestral
populations were always in therap we
evolved to be in therapeutic ketosis
mainly because high carbohydrate foods
were not available in the environment.
Okay, we we our technology the Neolithic
period grains and things we were able to
selectively develop high fructose. We
were able to selectively develop uh
highly processed foods. All right. So,
so prevention is keeping your
mitochondria healthy. Uh water only
fasting and also we developed the
glucose ketone index calculator, the GKI
index to let people know whether or not
they're in therapeutic ketosis. It's
like the guy in this paper here. He went
on a carnivore diet to get maintain his
low low blood sugar and elevated
ketones. P
>> Pablo
>> Pablo did he did a carnivore. He was
eating big steaks with butter and ghee
and lamb chops and and he ate small
amounts but his GKI was always very low.
Now can a vegan achieve the same low
GKI? Probably. So it doesn't really make
any difference what you are eating. It's
the amount and types of foods that you
are eating. As long as you can be in a
state of high nutrition and low glucose
elevated ketones, your mitochondria are
going to be humming. They're going to be
doing very very well. So, you know, and
if
>> running they're going to be running on
Vich's super fuel.
>> Yes. Exactly. Exactly. And uh
>> is it do you think it's any danger of
staying in ketosis long term? Should you
cycle in and out from what your bio I
know this is not your focus but I know
I'm sure you've seen stuff as you
>> know I listen I know Domino. Did you
have him on your show?
>> Yes, I have.
>> Okay. Dom is always in therapeutic
ketosis.
>> Yeah.
>> He shows me the the his ketone glucose
meter and tells me look what I got
today. Look what I've done. I eat this.
I do that. And Dom is always in
therapeutic ketosis. Now mild
>> and he's he's an amazing researcher for
anybody who's not familiar with his
work. Well, he and I published papers
together and we go back and forth about
so he he be I had a student in my lab.
They fasted for four straight days. This
young lady, girls can get into ketosis
easier than guys. They got more body
fat. It's unbelievable. So, we've had
guys in the lab that never could match
some of the women. So, anyway, this
young lady
>> thought that we should be competing
about ketone levels.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's an interesting point.
>> No, but he did. So I showed him the the
GKI value on this young lady that we had
one of my students and he says oh very
impressive. And then four days later he
takes a picture of his glucose ketone
meter
and he says deep. So what he what what
he did listen he took he went on
a 4-day fast himself water only and then
he he chugged his uh developed ketone
solution.
>> Yeah. It so tastes so bad. He built a
straw that goes beyond his taste buds so
he can suck down the ketones so he
doesn't have to taste them. Right.
>> So he is a he is a brilliant researcher,
but he is a little bananas. I will say
he he's the he's the fellow who, if I
remember correctly, injected insulin to
see how low he could get his blood
glucose and he got it down to quote
undetectable. And
>> you know, you're supposed to go into a
coma at that point, but he was fine.
Yeah, he's
>> I mean it was an amazing definitely a
don't try this at home folks but a
rather amazing demonstration of the
power of ketones. Well, and and listen,
the paper by Drenic, which was published
in in um in experimental biology and
medicine, which is a top journal, they
took uh o overweight people, obese
people basically, and gave them water
only for for 21 days. 21 days and then
injected them with insulin and and that
the lowest the lowest guy they got was
0.5
millmer or 9 milligrams per decade.
>> Nine milligrams. That's right. That was
who was the lead author on that or
Drenic
>> the first the first author was Drenic
but who was it was starts with a C. I
can't remember it right now.
>> Yeah. Um the Drenic paper is um let's
see who Drenic is here. Hope I didn't
lose anybody. It was Arnold uh Buck
Brickman.
>> Arnold Brickman.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Um yeah, but that I mean that's
you know and that's that's another thing
that one often hears. Um
oh there it is. Um that's another thing
that one often hears when one goes to
see a
>> Oh yeah, there it is. Drenic, that's
right. This is a different paper from
what I was thinking of. um is this they
claim that there's this necessity for
carbohydrates in the diet as if
>> you go on a low carbohydrate diet and
your brain is immediately going to
wither and die and that's a rather
ridiculous oversimplification of things.
>> No, that's true. And and the re and
another thing David why it's so hard to
do all this is the our in our western
societies today I think most of us many
of us are addicted to glucose. It's like
a drug. Um, you try getting off glucose,
man, and you you have withdrawal
symptoms as if you were trying to get
off nicotine or or
>> And the thing the thing that I've
noticed is it's like it starts when the
addiction is passed on familiarly by
the, you know, to the kid by loading
them up with sugar.
>> Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Not even an oatmeal
and all this stuff. And I and it just I
wonder what are we doing to kids?
Because they always say those first few
years of a child's life are so
foundational for their health. And I
wonder what we're switching on in terms
of genes or or and and not even just
that, but just the patterns of comfort
food. You know, if children were raised
eating steak more than eating uh cereal
and sugar, maybe they would have a they
would go to a steak when they're 50
years old and stressed out about their
job, you know, rather than going back to
corn syrup as their comfort food. No, I
I I agree with you and and and like I
said about the chimps, when I asked the
the veterinarian at the at the at the
the zoo here in Boston, I said, you
know, do you feed do you ever feed pizza
and you know, donuts to your to your
chimpanzees
or the gorillas? And they said, no, that
would be animal cruelty.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, there's a there's a paper that
shows that if you feed too many bananas
to monkeys, they get diabetes. So, they
don't do that in zoos.
>> Yeah. Well, the these are all the issues
that but you know
>> is that does that mean Tucker that d
that sugar can cause diabetes alone
without seed oils? I thought the seed
oil thing has to be
>> we don't know what else they were
feeding him.
>> Yeah. I mean there's always more but you
know the the cancer issue I think is a
manageable disease and I think that if
we do it the right way but I but I think
the it's not a question of do we know
enough about science. We we have a very
clear crystal understanding of of what
the science is involved. Then if the
science is crystal clear, then the issue
for why we're not doing metabolic
therapy for managing cancer must be
something other than the scientific
mechanisms involved.
>> So Yahoo News, a listener sent me a
story, I guess, in relation to this uh
upcoming interview we announced with
you. Uh researchers find biological
links between red meat and colorctal
cancer. This came out on no
>> June 18. And it says, "Eating less red
meat is standard medical advice for
preventing colorectile cancer. A new
paper in the journal Cancer Discovery
has now identified specific patterns of
DNA damage triggered by diets rich in
red meat, further implicating the food
as a carcinogen while heralding the
possibility of detecting the cancer
early and designing new treatments. Uh
it says that uh they uh they looked at
uh DNA data from 900 patients with
colorctal cancer who were drawn from a
much larger group of 280,000 workers.
And they they noticed there was the um
the analysis revealed a distinct
mutational signature, a pattern that had
never before been identified but was
indicative of a type of DNA damage
called alkalation. Is that right?
>> Alcalation. Yes.
>> What is it? What do you think of that?
Is that is that a something that needs
to be looked into?
>> It's irrelevant, David. It's completely
irrelevant. The DNA damage is none of
that stuff is relevant. The nuclear
transfer experiments already show the
DNA damage has nothing to do with
cancer.
>> So, why are they saying it's all
downstream effects? So, and the other
thing is if you eat a lot of red meat,
uh are they eating only steaks like
nothing else? You mean not a potato? Uh
not a piece of bread, uh or anything
else along with that steak? Um you know,
what are they eating along with the
steaks every day? You know, now I if
you're eating organic beef and these
cows are eating grass and and oats and
things and they're not being jacked up
with all kinds of uh hormones and all
this other that they give these
animals, you know, I don't think eating
organic beef is going to be a risk
factor for developing cancer.
>> Um, our ancestors, our anes
Indians ate buffalo meat all the time
when they could get it. Um, it's the
amount and quality of the animal, the
the be the material that you're eating,
>> right? Uh,
>> well, and there's there's David had
asked me to look into this over the
weekend. I haven't had an opportunity to
do so yet, but
we, you know, if you look up what? So,
what causes alkalation in uh colon
cancer? It seems, and there's another
paper that looks exactly on this, right?
It's the polyunsaturated fats in the
diet which are oxygenated or oxidized by
the heem in the red meat. So the red
meat is involved into chemicals that
cause genetic damage. H& causes p-53
mutation in multiple cancer types. And
the alkalation that they're describing,
although I haven't looked at the paper
yet, is likely the result of these
polyunsaturated fats breaking down.
That's typically what causes it in vivo.
Yeah. Um, it's in my mind it's it's
largely irrelevant because again it's
falling back that statement suggests
that cancer is a genetic disease based
on DNA.
>> No, no, no. Doesn't have anything to do
with genetics. It does in the sense that
when you're looking at cancer, you see
multiple apparently random genetic
mutations, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So if you're eating a food that is a
mutagen, then random mutations is what
you would expect to see because the
mutagens are just going in and you know
>> Yeah. But where the random mutations are
coming from reactive oxygen species in
the mitochondria. So what why would
>> ah ah no they're not. The mutagen is
what the ROS causes the polyunsaturated
fats to break down into because the
roths are typically don't get out of the
mitochondria. The things that pass
through the mitochondria are the
aldahhides that are generated by Ross
oxidation of the polyunsaturated fats in
the cardipin in the m in the
mitochondria. And there's a paper from
2011 looking at that process. This is
something I really think you ought to
look into, by the way, because in
reading through your excellent 2020
paper
um on ATP generation in the
mitochondria,
screaming out at me the whole time I was
reading it was he's not aware of this
pathway
>> because it explains a lot of your
observations. Yeah. And we can get into
that off
>> but I if you're interested off
>> No, but that's okay. They I because I
did in the I science paper I did site
um several articles showing that the uh
the Ross are carcinogenic and mutagenic.
Okay.
>> Yes. But the the alkalides
uh or I'm sorry the chemicals like H&H
the aldahhides are about a thousand
times more damaging than the Ross.
>> Well that could be sure. I mean, I'm not
I I I don't
>> Okay, but again, you know, this is this
is not something you're familiar with. I
didn't mean to.
>> No, that's okay. I I
>> think it's an interesting pathway that
you should look into, and I think it
would help tie a lot of the observations
in that paper.
>> And what was the P pathway? Let me make
sure I I have it down because I I like
to look at everything.
>> It's polyunsaturated fats breaking down
into aldahhides like HNA and melon
dialed, which are both described as
mutagens. Um,
I'll send you the papers that I found on
this.
>> Yeah, send offline, Tucker. Send them to
me so I can uh be aware and and see how
that integrates into into the into what
we what we know is going on here. So,
um, but you know, I I we are always uh
we don't want to leave any stone
unturned.
>> You're like a detective. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Well, I don't want
>> biology is insanely complicated. So, you
can look at a lot of things,
you know, you can look at a lot of
things and then there's something else
going on and you just never stumble
across it, right? I mean, it's not in
any way.
>> Well, I agree. You know, you know,
again,
>> we're we're looking at epiphenomena
associated with with the process, right?
the the an epiphenomena by their very
nature is very difficult. Epigenetics,
people like to talk about epigenetics.
This is a kind of a Lamarian thing and
it's very very complicated and it's very
u you know confusing. The the you know
bringing it back to simple terms though
um when you know that the cancer cannot
survive on any other fuel except glucose
and glutamine it pretty much tells you
the path to follow to manage the
disease. So it's it's locked into a
fermentation metabolism driven by two
fuels only glucose and glutamine. How do
I know that? Because we have tested all
these fuels. We can't we can't find
anything that can replace these two
fuels. I mean sure sorbos can but the
sorbos is not in your body. Sorbos can
replace glucose.
>> Sorbos is a synthetic
>> sugar substitute. Correct.
>> Yeah. But but it's also no it's made
it's made it's made it's not none of our
food substances have sorbos so but can
anyh carbohydrate replace glucose and
the answer is yeah there are a couple
but they simply never exist in foods or
in our body so so um so you know it's
that kind of a thing but no other amino
acid that we can find that can replace
glutamine so
>> is that is that does that mean it
prevents metastasis too
>> oh yeah because the metastatic cell is
glutamine driven It's all cancer. This
is what the whole thing is. Lung cancer,
colon cancer, breast cancer, brain
cancer, they're all dependent on glucose
and glutamine,
>> period. So, uh it's profoundly
uh transformational when you understand
the biochemist because I looked into all
these different cancers and they all
depend on glucose and glutamine.
>> Well, Dr. Seafed, we've really uh really
appreciate your time. I want to give you
an opportunity to wrap up and point
people to any future work or any other
further reading and as well as give us
your big picture view because you hinted
at there earlier maybe the entrepreneurs
can can can provide I I know this is so
crass that we have to do this in science
but the science is distorted because of
money. So if there's what what are some
things that entrepreneurs or whoever can
do to to get this uh information uh to
become the standard of care or a part of
the standard of care, you know?
>> Yes. Yes. More broadly, what would push
this over to becoming a standard of
care? Well, I I just discussed yesterday
with a group of physicians that are
attempting to set up a venture capital
uh uh firm to do this and they wanted to
know what you need to do. And I said,
well, we published the press pulse paper
uh therapeutic strategy for managing
cancer called press pulse. I did it with
some of my physician friends and we put
put a framework together about how to
how to manage cancer uh using metabolic
approach. The press is our diets and
nutritional and um um mindful techniques
to reduce the anxiety and glucose sugars
and bring the patient first into a state
of therapeutic ketosis and then we pulse
with various drugs and procedures that
will target the glycolysis and
glutaminolysis pathways. So the first
thing we do is we bring patients in, we
get a blood work on them. uh we can tell
right off the bat what level of health
status they are
>> and stress is important because of the
cortisol.
>> Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. We we
cancer patients are under emotional
stress. They think impending doom.
>> Doesn't doesn't ketosis create cortisol
stress?
>> No. when you when you it it might a
little bit at the beginning, but you use
the G the GKI calculator to uh to
determine whether or not you're in
because if your blood sugar is low and
your ketones are elevated, you're in
therapeutic ketosis and that and also
>> and also the cortisol from ketosis may
be a short-term phenomenon as the body's
initially unable to utilize ketones.
>> Yes, it's a it's a transient thing.
>> So, it's not there's no evidence that
ketosis long term creates chronic
cortisol and stress.
>> Good a good point. We're not we're not
trying to take people and put them into
a new metabolic state for the rest of
their life. We're using the metabolic
transformation to kill tumor cells and
keep the body at enhanced state until
the tumor is no longer detectable and uh
for many different uh non-invasive ways
that we can do this. So we would have
people no punch biopsies because we've
shown and others others have shown that
uh that creates some a destabilization
of the micro environment called um
inflammatory encoaxis which could
facilitate the spread of cancer cells
that are that are on the on the verge of
becoming metastatic or more metastatic.
So we use non-invasive ways to assess uh
the initial uh uh diagnosis as well as
the success of the therapeutic approach.
Um generally the patients start to get
very healthy. I've spoken to so many
people who they don't lose their hair.
Uh now everybody says oh we we going to
go weight weight loss weight loss. Well
if you are overweight yes you will lose
some weight. If you are at appropriate
weight level, we can have a metabolic
therapy that will maintain the
appropriate weight that you have. And
>> well, but that's a that's a great that's
a great point. There are different kinds
of weight loss. And
>> if you're overweight, you're predisposed
to being to cancers of all sorts.
>> And yet, as soon as you start losing
weight and cancer, they seem to want to
give you foods that are going to like
ensure that are just going to put on
body fat, not muscle weight.
>> Absolutely.
>> Muscle weight is what's healthy.
>> Yeah. Why are you why are the patient
losing weight? Because he was just
irradiated and poisoned. You can take
anybody and and give them Listen, I have
one guy, a brain cancer guy told me he
got so sick from teamomide, he didn't
eat anything. He just drank liquids for
uh eight days and then and so and they
say, "Oh, look how temolomide it's
killing."
>> Yeah. It's it's also a great point to
note that ketone makes people more
resistant to chemotherapy toxicity.
>> Yeah. Well, if I have some friends in in
in Turkey who are using uh what they
call metabolically supported
chemotherapy. So, it's very low dose of
chemo together with therapeutic ketosis
and that works too. I think we're going
to be able to skin this cat many
different ways. But the but the issue is
how do you keep the patient in a high
state of health and vitality while you
go through the process of gradually
degrading these neoplastic cells and the
press pulse therapeutic strategy is the
outline by which this will be achieved.
So uh whether it's metastatic cancer or
whatever. Now, I'm not completely
eliminating the need for some type of
maybe a chemo at this particular point
of the treatment or perhaps a radiation
treatment. If if you can assure a 95%
chance of no adverse effects and uh an
complete remission of the tumor, if they
have if that can be done, then I would
certainly support something like that.
But brain cancer irdiating uh this kind
of thing is just counterproductive in
every kind of a way. So we we and my
colleagues have written a a major
protocol on how to treat cancer using
metabolic therapy and uh we've consulted
with a variety of physicians and
nutritionists, dieticians and the guys
who actually know this and it can be
done. Um
>> has this been has this been published?
>> Uh well it's published in part in the
press pulse therapy. the actual
treatment protocol has not been
published, but because we're it's a work
in progress and we're working with
everybody has an opportunity to uh to um
add or subtract things on the protocol
that we all believe would be the maximum
uh
>> okay so there's a 2017 paper in
nutrition and metabolism a journal I
really like uh press pulse a novel
therapeutic strategy for the metabolic
management of cancer
>> you're the first author and Don
Dagustinino is also listed as an author.
Yeah.
>> So, I guess that would be a really
interesting paper for us all to go read.
>> Yeah, it is.
>> Understanding that it's not the final
word on things. It is four years old.
>> It's an outline. But, you know, even
though it's an outline, it's it's it's
um interrupting
uh standards of care as as uh adapted by
the American Medical Association. So um
they cannot do medical they because a
lot of physicians will lose their
license if they if they embark on this
kind of a treatment protocol even with
the evidence that it works even with the
understanding of the scientific
mechanisms behind it.
>> It is it's not being used. So what
specifically needs to happen to make
this part of the standard of care?
Because like if if the media, they won't
do this, but you know, the media put on
the deaths of CO every day and you said
1,600 uh people die from cancer every
day, right?
>> Every day because
>> imagine if they put that number up every
day, 1600 deaths, 1,600 over and over
again. 500,000 people a year or more.
>> Well, actually, the big thing came out
recently, David, that the uh COVID had
killed over 600,000 people this year.
Cancer kills 620,000 people every year.
Every year,
>> right?
>> You know, so so how do we how do we
>> treatment protocol is basically been in
chasing its tail for the last several
decades.
>> So what what needs to happen? You got to
do double blind studies or something.
>> No, no. Here's you know, here's the
situation. Our focus is on the on the
people. The people will make the
decision, not the top medical schools.
uh just like the the the patient
advocates forced an Alzheimer's drug
into the clinic that had s the
scientists felt didn't wasn't going to
work. The the thing with the cancer is
we have something that actually works
>> right and it's not
>> it's just it's just like Verta. I mean,
Verta
>> was taking a treatment that was laughed
at by the medical authorities and was
certainly not considered the standard of
care and then they demonstrated efficacy
and all of a sudden,
>> you know, and it wasn't an RCT,
>> but it worked. So, all of a sudden the
ADA is like, "Oh, and by the way, this
treatment is, you know, worth
considering." Yeah.
>> You know, they moved the needle very
quickly.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, right now you hear
advertised every night on television all
the different imunotherapies, all the
different drugs to help you uh recover
from being irdiated and poisoned. Yeah.
All that stuff has to go away. I mean,
you don't need to do that. So, where is
the power coming from? The power must
come from the cancer patients
themselves. This paper by Pablo, if you
have a glyobblasto, you want to read
this paper and you want to ask your
oncologist, why can't I do what he is
doing? Oh, no, it doesn't work. Well,
what do you mean it doesn't work? This
guy is he's out there seven years. He
never had the horrific situations that
all these other people are having. Uh we
published a paper.
>> Dr. Safed, I cannot tell you how much I
agree with that statement that it has to
be driven by the patients that you know
just as with epilepsy, you're going to
wait a hundred years for them to come
around.
>> Oh, sure. So, uh programs like David's
um facilitate the awareness of the
population,
>> which is why we're doing this.
>> Yeah. to recognize
>> even Hodkins lymphoma is something that
can be affected by it.
>> Absolutely. They're all the same. I
looked in fact if you Tucker has our eye
science paper and lymph all the lymphas
are are listed in there. All of these
cancers have damaged respiration.
Therefore, they must ferment. What do
they ferment? Glucose and glutamine. If
you take away glucose and glutamine, the
tumor cells can't survive. So
>> yeah, we'll we'll we'll put some show
notes with links to these papers in
there so that
>> people can follow up on this. Dr.
>> is is it true that you have to have
something I mean it seems like in order
for something to be a part of the
standard of care, it has to go through
the FDA approval process which kind of
precludes anything that can't be
patented, right? Because how can you
afford like for example, let's say uh
some pharmaceutical company said, "Hey,
you know what? You're right." So they
spend a billion dollars doing all the
FDA approval process requirements 10 to
15 years but then everybody in the
industry can use it. So how how do we
actually see that's why I'm skeptical.
How can we change the standard of care?
>> Yeah. Well, it's not just the FDA,
David. It's also the uh IRB, the
institutional review boards. They're the
ones in the hospitals that make the
decision as to what treatment they
should use.
>> Yeah. Dietary therapies don't go through
the FDA typically.
>> Yeah. Well, the IRB board in the
hospital has to make the decision. the
physicians themselves and they shut it
down every time.
>> Um they won't they won't do it. Um
>> is that one decision for the country or
is it state by state? I don't know
anything about hospital by hospital.
>> Hospital by hospital.
>> So are some hospitals doing what you're
doing?
>> Yeah. Uh no it won't go through the they
won't allow it. It's just I
>> What are they afraid of? Is it some kind
of government regulation that's keeping
>> No, no, no. It's revenue. It's revenues.
It's revenue generation.
>> Well, there there's hints of a change. I
mean, if you're familiar with Dr. Mark
Cookazella down in West Virginia. He
finally got his hospital to agree to
break their contract with Coca-Cola and
Pepsi Cola and stop serving hospital
patients
>> soda while they're in the hospital,
which sounds nuts that they do it. So,
there is there are some glimmers of
hope.
>> Yes. Well, that that's a glimmer. That's
a that's a pigeon tiny step. Um but I I
had one guy a physician got so a
radiation oncologist got so upset he
started to storm out and one of his
colleagues said you know sit down sit
down he says listen he says if seafared
is right we're going to have to shut
half the hospitals down in the country
and I and I said to I said I said to him
why he said radiation oncology generates
so much revenue it pays for all the
bills.
>> Wow.
>> And now you're telling me you can't this
is David it's revenue generation. Say
it. It's revenue generation
>> which is doc Dr. Richard Bernstein who
originally came up with the protocol
that Verda finally put into practice 40
years later his personal physician his
endocrinologist was the head of the
American Diabetes Association and he
said way back then I can't have
everybody testing their own glucose
that's a major part of my business it's
all business so that's why it has to
come down to the patient
>> and cancer is your a live situation it's
not like getting rid of diabet etes or
anything else. It's it's a life or death
decision on the part of the patient.
Okay. Yeah. You can die from diabetes,
but it's slow killer over time. But
cancer will kill you if you don't do the
right thing. Yes. And and horrifically.
>> So, you don't want to suffer and and you
don't you want something that's going to
work and and it has a reason for why
it's going to work. And the people like
this paper from it's getting you can't
believe how many downloads the paper
already has in less than three weeks.
And I think you know Dr. Seaf Freed, you
haven't really made this point. I you
sort of touched on it but this isn't
in com I mean hopefully it will replace
standard cancer care but there is
absolutely nothing wrong with doing this
approach in concert with standard cancer
care. So
>> if it can work synergistically and you
have
>> it can work synergistically and there's
no evidence that I'm aware of for any
harm in doing this approach
synergistically. And that's a real key
point.
>> Oh sure. And and the thing of it is in
some of these guys they're not stupid.
They're smart. They're going to say well
yeah it'll work better with uh standards
of care. But then they're going to
realize that it works a hell of a lot
better without the chemo and the
radiation.
>> Right. Yeah.
>> Right. because you're not you're not
poisoning yourself at the same time. I
mean that's
>> so what needs to happen because if we
did a poll right now I know this is
sobering to think but if we did a poll
about Americans are you ready to do the
metabolic no one would know anything
about it. So how do we shift the
conversation outside of the people like
us the nerds that follow you?
>> No no I think a lot of people a lot
believe me David a lot of people have
heard about keto metabolic therapy they
just don't know how it works. uh in the
Pablo Kelly paper and figure four uh I
published uh clearly uh what's going on
uh with this gene and how that diet and
the gene are working synergistically and
then we said for those individuals not
fortunate enough to get the god-given by
chance Idh1 there are some drugs that
will do the same thing so um nobody's
using them nobody is using these kinds
of drugs
>> have you been have you ever been asked
to testify in front of Congress or
anything to suggest them to look at
No, I mean I I just think the move the
movement is still in its infancy and I
and I think my job my job was primarily
to I outlined the scientific uh
validation for why it works. Uh it works
but what how and and how it works is
what I've done and uh linked all the
different variables together and brought
it down to a very a very narrow way to
manage cancer without toxicity. So, I
think once the word gets out, and it's
getting out, believe me, it's people
listen, when you're a life and death
situation. You have somebody and this
guy Pablo Kelly, uh, why should he be
alive and so many thousands of others
aren't?
>> And he's not the only fellow who's had
glyobblasto. I mean, there's another
fellow I'm familiar with on
>> Twitter who did the exact same approach.
>> Yeah,
>> I think he was a beg you pardon,
>> Andrew Scarboro. There's several Yeah.
And several other Allison Ganet. there's
more and more people that are and then
by chance alone you get somebody that
you know didn't do standard of care and
I I have others. Um but you know it's
it's a it's a it's a buster to ball
buster actually to write these goddamn
things up. I mean I mean writing case
human case reports listen I I work on uh
you know biology department I'm working
on on preclinical systems. We have every
all the variables are controlled. You
talk about people who, you know, aren't
following. They're not doing what the
mice do. Uh children,
we're working on actually we're working
on a young girl. Uh that's our next big
project. A young a young child who has
um DIPG, diffuse infiltrative pontene
gooma, invariably fatal, and she's doing
very well. She did metabolic therapy and
then she did some radiation while in
heavy ketosis and she's doing remarkably
well. So, um, that's our
>> and there are there are reasons to think
that radiation therapy under ketosis
would be much more beneficial than doing
it in a standard way because you're
better able to target the cancer cells.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, our guy from
Egypt, if you read if you read the Pablo
Kelly paper carefully, we I said in
there his he died from he was on ketosis
when he was doing radiation, but he he
eventually died at 30 months from brain
liquefiation
necrosis despite the fact that he was on
therapeutic ketosis.
>> Right. Well, yes, there's
>> so you want to look,
>> you know, and that's that's another
important point to make is that what's
most sus susceptible to damage from
radiation in your body is the
polyunsaturated fats. And I mean, the
research on that goes back to the 1950s.
And your brain is mostly composed of
polyunsaturated fats. So irdiating your
brain is just,
>> you know, I mean, it may be the best
alternative possible, but it's a
profoundly bad idea. Well, I don't think
it's the best. I think it's the worst
thing you can do to anybody. You know,
in fact, I I wrote I I wrote in in our
provocative question paper and I
outlined in excruciating detail what
radiation does to brain and why it frees
up so much glucose and glutamine that in
invariably recur occurs recurrence and
kills the patient. So, there was nothing
more clear. And then when you and then
when you see the the consistency of
survival everywhere in the world doing
they're all doing the exact same thing
and they all get the exact same
>> or rather the or rather the consistency
of death.
>> Yeah. You know
>> what is what does the carb rate need to
be daily to stay in ketosis for people
as a prevention.
>> Well that that varies David that varies
from one person to the next. Uh some
people can do it on one diet other
people on a different diet. That's
what's called personalized medicine. And
I tell the doctors, you want
personalized medicine, you do metabolic
therapy because now your pat each
patient is a different metabolic entity.
And it's
>> although it's important, it's important
to note that according to the Institute
of Medicine, there is no requirement for
carbohydrates in the diet for humans and
that's been known for a long time.
>> So I think I think we have many uh uh we
have a I I personally have a very clear
understanding.
>> All right. Well, we we'll let you go,
but I I really appreciate your time.
Thank you very much. It was an honor.
Thank you, doctor.
>> Yeah. And if any if you have any other
questions or anybody wants to have ask a
question, they can always email me. And
um I I'll be because I deal with I I get
maybe 20 or 30 uh cancer patients a week
uh asking me to help them. And I I I I'm
not a physician. I'm not a uh uh I I
can't I can't tell them what to do. I
can only give them educational material.
And they read the educational material
and then they come to their own
decisions as to how they would like to
proceed with the management of their
particular tumor.